feat: adds 'Check Block Feature' content (#12)
masterpointio/masterpoint.io: content/updates/understanding-the-terraform-check-block-feature.md

---
visible: true

> draft: false

Reviewer: @gberenice make this true and it will show in the Netlify preview! 👍

title: "Understanding the Terraform Check Block Feature"
author: Veronika Gnilitska
slug: understanding-the-terraform-check-block-feature
date: TBD
description: "We dive into one of Terraform's most recent features to leverage infrastructure validation."
# image: TBD
---

> Table of Contents

Reviewer: We should fine a nice way to generate this -- Did you already do so?

Author: I was using this tool [github-markdown-toc](https://github.com/ekalinin/github-markdown-toc#gh-md-toc), but I dug a bit, and this extension seems to work better for our purposes [markdown-all-in-one](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzhang.markdown-all-in-one). It updates the TOC is automatically on file save by default.

=================
* [Overview](#overview)
* [How could this feature benefit my infrastructure?](#how-could-this-feature-benefit-my-infrastructure)
* [Do I need this if I'm already testing my Terraform code?](#do-i-need-this-if-im-already-testing-my-terraform-code)
* [How this can be set up?](#how-this-can-be-set-up)
* [Using a data source in the assertions - In progress](#using-a-data-source-in-the-assertions---in-progress)
* [Are there any potential pitfalls? - TBD](#are-there-any-potential-pitfalls---tbd)
* [Possible improvemends - TBD](#possible-improvemends---tbd)
* [Conclusion - TBD](#conclusion---tbd)
* [References](#references)

## Overview

> Terraform offers multiple ways to ensure the accuracy of the infrastructure configuration with standard HCL features and syntax. These include defining validation conditions for input variables and specifying preconditions and postconditions for resources, data sources, and output.

Reviewer: We should link to these features within Hashi docs. 
```suggestion
Terraform offers multiple ways to ensure the accuracy of the infrastructure configuration with standard HCL features and syntax. These include defining [validation conditions for input variables](TODO) and specifying [preconditions and postconditions](TODO) for resources, data sources, and output.
```

> With the release of version 1.5.0, Terraform has expanded its infrastructure validation capabilities by introducing the `check` feature. It allows testing assertions for the whole configuration with independent blocks as part of the infrastructure management workflow. A `check` block requires specifying at least one, but possibly multiple, assert blocks. Each assert block should include a `condition` expression and an `error_message` expression, matching the current [Custom Condition Checks](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/custom-conditions#custom-conditions). All `check` blocks will be evaluated as the last step of the Terraform `plan` and `apply` operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the release of version 1.5.0, Terraform has expanded its infrastructure validation capabilities by introducing the `check` feature. It allows testing assertions for the whole configuration with independent blocks as part of the infrastructure management workflow. A `check` block requires specifying at least one, but possibly multiple, assert blocks. Each assert block includes a `condition` expression and an `error_message` expression, matching the current [Custom Condition Checks](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/custom-conditions#custom-conditions). All `check` blocks will be evaluated as the last step of the Terraform `plan` and `apply` operations.
```

This is where `check` blocks come into play, stepping in to handle assertions when the actual provisioning isn't the primary focus. Given the necessity of configuring external tools and writing tests in Ruby or Go, native HCL `check` blocks can be seen as a practical alternative. They can be used before running tests in sandbox environments — whether ephemeral or persistent, hosted in the cloud, or run locally using mocking tools.
In fact, the main practical testing scenario might involve validating the provisioning of the proposed changes. In certain instances, examining a single attribute of the final state could be sufficient.

## How this can be set up?
Adding a simple check is trivial. Let’s assume we have a root module that manages AWS EKS cluster configuration and contains the resource `aws_eks_cluster`:
```hcl
resource "aws_eks_cluster" "default" {
 name     = "my-cluster"
 role_arn = var.role_arn
 vpc_config {
   subnet_ids = var.subnet_ids
 }
}
```

> To start using `check` block, ensure you’re using Terraform v1.5+. It’s recommended to use a ~> constraint to set bounds on versions of Terraform and providers a [root module](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules#the-root-module) depends on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start using the `check` block, ensure you’re using Terraform v1.5+. It’s recommended to use the [pessimistic constraint operator](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/version-constraints#-3) (i.e. `~>`) to set bounds on the version of Terraform and the providers a [root module](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules#the-root-module) depends on:
```

```hcl
terraform {
 required_version = "~> 1.5"

 required_providers {
   aws = {
     source  = "hashicorp/aws"
     version = "~> 4.0"
   }
 }
}
```

Let’s define a check that validates that our cluster instance is healthy and available:
```hcl
check "aws_eks_cluster_default" {
 assert {
   condition     = aws_eks_cluster.default.status == "ACTIVE"
   error_message = "EKS cluster ${aws_eks_cluster.default.id} status is ${aws_eks_cluster.default.status}"
 }
}
```

## Using a data source in the assertions - In progress
In addition to simple assertions, Terraform offers the ability to reference a data source within `check` block assertions. It’s queried by Terraform at the end of each operation to evaluate the checks and obtain the most recent data from your environment.
Terraform’s operation won’t be interrupted by failures in the scoped data block or any unsuccessful assertions. This unlocks continuous validation of your assumptions about the infrastructure rather than being confined to the point of initial provisioning.

> Also, this allows to utilize [`external` data source](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/external/latest/docs/data-sources/external) provided by Hashicorp. It green-lights integration of arbitrary external scripts into your Terraform configuration. This can be a Python script, a shell script, or any other program that can read JSON from standard input and write JSON to standard output. It's worth noting that the use of the external data source comes with a caveat: it can potentially make your configuration depend on the specific environment where it runs, as it might rely on specific external scripts being available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, this allows to utilize [`external` data source](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/external/latest/docs/data-sources/external) provided by Hashicorp. It green-lights integration of arbitrary external scripts into your Terraform configuration. This can be a Python script, a shell script, or any other program that can read JSON from standard input and write JSON to standard output. It's worth noting that the use of the external data source comes with a caveat: it can potentially make your configuration depend on the specific environment where it runs, as it might rely on specific external scripts and language runtimes being available.
```

---
visible: true
draft: false
title: "Understanding the Terraform Check Block Feature"
author: Veronika Gnilitska
slug: understanding-the-terraform-check-block-feature
date: TBD
description: "We dive into one of Terraform's most recent features to leverage infrastructure validation."
image: /img/updates/tf-check-blog-post.png
---
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>

- [Overview](#overview)
- [How could this feature benefit my infrastructure?](#how-could-this-feature-benefit-my-infrastructure)
- [Do I need this if I'm already testing my Terraform code?](#do-i-need-this-if-im-already-testing-my-terraform-code)
- [How can this be set up?](#how-can-this-be-set-up)
- [Using a data source in the assertions](#using-a-data-source-in-the-assertions)
  - [Limitations to consider](#limitations-to-consider)
- [Are there any potential pitfalls?](#are-there-any-potential-pitfalls)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [References](#references)

> ## Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Intro
```

Terraform offers multiple ways to ensure the accuracy of the infrastructure configuration with standard HCL features and syntax. These include defining [validation conditions for input variables](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/custom-conditions#input-variable-validation) and specifying [preconditions and postconditions](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/custom-conditions#preconditions-and-postconditions) for resources, data sources, and output.

> With the release of version 1.5.0, Terraform has expanded its infrastructure validation capabilities by introducing the `check` feature. It allows testing assertions for the whole configuration with independent blocks as part of the infrastructure management workflow. A `check` block requires specifying at least one, but possibly multiple, assert blocks. Each assert block includes a `condition` expression and an `error_message` expression, matching the current [Custom Condition Checks](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/custom-conditions#custom-conditions). All `check` blocks will be evaluated as the last step of the Terraform `plan` and `apply` operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the release of version 1.5.0, Terraform has expanded its infrastructure validation capabilities by introducing the `check` feature. It allows testing assertions for the whole configuration with independent blocks as part of the infrastructure management workflow. A `check` block requires specifying at least one, but possibly multiple, assert blocks. Each assert block includes a `condition` expression and an `error_message` expression, matching the current [Custom Condition Checks](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/custom-conditions#custom-conditions). All `check` blocks will be evaluated as the last step of the Terraform `plan` and `apply` operations.

In this article, we'll be diving into this new feature, show you how it can be used in the real world, and discuss the potential pitfalls. 
```

## How could this feature benefit my infrastructure?

Unlike the previously mentioned options, `check` blocks are not coupled with the lifecycle of a specific resource, data source, or variable. A check can validate any attribute of the infrastructure or the functionality of the resource itself in the Terraform runs.

Here are some potential use cases to apply this feature:

1. **Service state validation:** utilize the `check` block to confirm the operational status of services. For instance, you can verify that database instances, Kubernetes clusters, or virtual machines are up and running, ensuring the overall health of your infrastructure.

> 1. **Endpoint confirmation:** leverage checks to validate endpoint connectivity. This involves sending an HTTP request and expecting a successful 200 response, ensuring that your services are accessible and interactable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Endpoint confirmation:** leverage checks to validate endpoint connectivity. This involves sending an HTTP request and expecting a successful 200 response, ensuring that your services are accessible and available.
```

> 2. **Out-of-band change detection:** an unanticipated change made outside Terraform can cause surprising failures, especially if it can't be detected via a built-in drift detection mechanism (for instance, when another root module manages a resource). Checks come in handy to detect such deviations as the expiration of a TLS certificate or authentication tokens, preventing unforeseen interruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Out-of-band change detection:** an unanticipated change made outside Terraform can cause surprising failures, especially if it can't be detected via a built-in drift detection mechanism (for instance, when another root module manages a resource). Checks can come in handy to ensure deviations such as the expiration of a TLS certificate or authentication tokens won't create unforeseen interruptions.
```

_Infrastructure validation_ generally refers to checking the correctness of infrastructure code against specified standards or requirements before it's deployed. For instance, native Terraform commands like `validate` or `plan` or tools like [TFLint](https://github.com/terraform-linters/tflint) mainly focus on the correctness of code and check the syntax and internal consistency, ensuring it's well-structured and free from apparent errors before deployment.

_Infrastructure testing_, on the other hand, usually takes place after the infrastructure has been provisioned and validates that it's functioning as expected. This can include unit tests, integration tests, functional tests, and acceptance tests, among others. Testing tools like [Kitchen-Terraform](https://newcontext-oss.github.io/kitchen-terraform/) and [Terratest](https://terratest.gruntwork.io/) are commonly used for these kinds of tests. They can confirm that resources are adequately created and connected, security groups allow/deny correct traffic, etc.

> Most infrastructure tools use declarative language to define the desired state. By its nature, declarative code does not specify the steps needed to reach this state. Inspecting the desired state's details to confirm proper changes while writing the tests can quickly become tedious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terraform uses declarative language to define the desired state of your infrastructure. By its nature, declarative code does not specify the steps needed to reach this state. Inspecting the desired state's details to confirm proper changes while writing the tests can quickly become tedious.
```

> This is where `check` blocks come into play, stepping in to handle assertions when the actual provisioning isn't the primary focus. Given the necessity of configuring external tools and writing tests in Ruby or Go, native HCL `check` blocks can be seen as a practical alternative. They can be used before running tests in sandbox environments — whether ephemeral or persistent, hosted in the cloud, or run locally using mocking tools.

Reviewer: This paragraph is a bit confusing to me and it is a critical paragraph. Do you mind explaining a couple things and we can hopefully clarify it a bit? 

> In fact, the main practical testing scenario might involve validating the provisioning of the proposed changes.

> In certain instances, examining a single attribute of the final state could be sufficient.

Do you mean here that you could check that your Kubernetes state is `UP` and that is fine? I think rewording to make something like that clear would be a good call. 

Also, I feel like we should answer the question "Do I need this if I’m already testing my Terraform code?", right?

Author: >Do you mean here that you could check that your Kubernetes state is UP and that is fine? I think rewording to make something like that clear would be a good call.

Yeah, a check like this can be enough. I could go way too theoretical, and sound hazy :/ Reworded that a bit, please let me know if that helped.

>Also, I feel like we should answer the question, "Do I need this if I’m already testing my Terraform code?", right?

I tried to draw a line between infra validation and testing (cause I see that people often don't separate these terms) and to show that `check` boosts infra validation (by design) AND, in some cases, serves testing purposes.
I feel like the answer to this question is open and should be left to the reader. If we provide an answer at this point, it might look like a too-early summary.
We can rename the chapter if this question sounds confusing. Does all the above make sense to you?

In fact, the main practical testing scenario might involve validating the provisioning of the proposed changes. In certain instances, examining a single attribute of the final state could be sufficient.

## How can this be set up?

Adding a simple check is trivial. Let’s assume we have a root module that manages AWS EKS cluster configuration and contains the resource `aws_eks_cluster`:
```hcl

> resource "aws_eks_cluster" "default" {
>  name     = "my-cluster"
>  role_arn = var.role_arn
>  vpc_config {
>    subnet_ids = var.subnet_ids
>  }
> }

Reviewer: Properly indenting. Otherwise it looks squished.

```suggestion
resource "aws_eks_cluster" "default" {
  name     = "my-cluster"
  role_arn = var.role_arn
  vpc_config {
    subnet_ids = var.subnet_ids
  }
}
```

```

> To start using the `check` block, ensure you’re using Terraform v1.5+. It’s recommended to use the [pessimistic constraint operator](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/version-constraints#-3) (i.e. `~>`) to set bounds on the version of Terraform and the providers a [root module](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules#the-root-module) depends on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start using the `check` block, ensure you’re using Terraform v1.5+. Since the release of terraform 1.0, we recommend to use the [pessimistic constraint operator](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/version-constraints#-3) (i.e. `~>`) to set bounds on the version of Terraform and the providers a [root module](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules#the-root-module) depends on:
```

```hcl
terraform {

>  required_version = "~> 1.5"
> 
>  required_providers {
>    aws = {
>      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
>      version = "~> 4.0"
>    }
>  }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  required_version = "~> 1.5"

  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "~> 4.0"
    }
  }
}
```

```

Let’s define a check that validates that our cluster instance is healthy and available:
```hcl

> check "aws_eks_cluster_default" {
>  assert {
>    condition     = aws_eks_cluster.default.status == "ACTIVE"
>    error_message = "EKS cluster ${aws_eks_cluster.default.id} status is ${aws_eks_cluster.default.status}"
>  }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
check "aws_eks_cluster_default" {
  assert {
    condition     = aws_eks_cluster.default.status == "ACTIVE"
    error_message = "EKS cluster ${aws_eks_cluster.default.id} status is ${aws_eks_cluster.default.status}"
  }
}
```

```

## Using a data source in the assertions

In addition to simple assertions, Terraform offers the ability to reference a data source within `check` block assertions. It’s queried by Terraform at the end of each operation to evaluate the checks and obtain the most recent data from your environment.

Terraform’s operation won’t be interrupted by failures in the scoped data block or any unsuccessful assertions. This unlocks continuous validation of your assumptions about the infrastructure rather than being confined to the point of initial provisioning.

> Also, this allows to utilize [`external`](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/external/latest/docs/data-sources/external) data source provided by Hashicorp. It green-lights integration of arbitrary external scripts into your Terraform configuration. This can be a Python script, a shell script, or any other program that can read JSON from standard input and write JSON to standard output. It's worth noting that the use of the external data source comes with a caveat: it can potentially make your configuration depend on the specific environment where it runs, as it might rely on specific external scripts and language runtimes being available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, this allows us to utilize the [`external`](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/external/latest/docs/data-sources/external) data source provided by Hashicorp. It green-lights integration of arbitrary external scripts into your Terraform configuration. This can be a Python script, a shell script, or any other program that can read JSON from standard input and write JSON to standard output. It's worth noting that the use of the external data source comes with a caveat: it can potentially make your configuration depend on the specific environment where it runs, as it might rely on specific external scripts and language runtimes being available. This can introduce complexity into your terraform runtime environment that you may want to avoid. 
```

> Let's consider an example from Masterpoint's module [masterpointio/terraform-aws-tailscale](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-aws-tailscale/tree/feature/check_auth_key) where we validate the desired object state using a data source. The module provisions an AWS EC2 instance that serves as a [Tailscale subnet router](https://tailscale.com/kb/1019/subnets/) device. The subnet router setup is deployed via `userdata`, and upon authentication with a [Tailnet key](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/tailscale/tailscale/latest/docs/resources/tailnet_key) — managed by Terraform — the device is automatically tagged. Correct tagging of the Tailscale subnet router is critical for its proper functioning. We can introduce the checks in [checks.tf](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-aws-tailscale/blob/feature/check_auth_key/checks.tf) to validate if the tags were successfully applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider an example from our own open source module [masterpointio/terraform-aws-tailscale](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-aws-tailscale/tree/feature/check_auth_key) where we validate the desired object state using a data source. We use this module to setup Tailscale, a modern VPN tool, that we use with our clients to help them easily access their private AWS resources like databases and internal services. Our module provisions an AWS EC2 instance that serves as a [Tailscale subnet router](https://tailscale.com/kb/1019/subnets/) device and that allows us to tunnel into our private network. The subnet router setup is deployed via `userdata`, and upon authentication with a [Tailnet key](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/tailscale/tailscale/latest/docs/resources/tailnet_key) — managed by Terraform — the device is automatically tagged. Correct tagging of the Tailscale subnet router is critical for its proper functioning. We can introduce the checks in [checks.tf](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-aws-tailscale/blob/feature/check_auth_key/checks.tf) to validate if the tags were successfully applied.
```

```hcl
variable "tailnet_name" {
  type        = string
  description = <<EOF
  This unique name of the Tailnet that is used when registering DNS entries, e.g. 'cat-crocodile.ts.net'.
  See https://tailscale.com/kb/1217/tailnet-name/ for more information.
  EOF
}

check "device" {
  data "tailscale_device" "default" {
    name     = format("%s.%s", module.this.id, var.tailnet_name)
    wait_for = "30s"
  }

  assert {
    condition     = length(data.tailscale_device.default.tags) > 0
    error_message = "Device ${data.tailscale_device.default.name} is not tagged."
  }

  assert {
    condition     = sort(data.tailscale_device.default.tags) == sort(tolist(local.tailscale_tags))
    error_message = <<EOF
    Device ${data.tailscale_device.default.name} is not tagged with the correct tags.
    The list of expected tags is: [${join(",", local.tailscale_tags)}]
    EOF
  }
}
```

Example of the failed assertion:
```sh
Warning: Check block assertion failed
  on ../../../terraform-aws-tailscale/checks.tf line 19, in check "device":
  19:     condition     =  sort(data.tailscale_device.default.tags) == sort(tolist(local.tailscale_tags))
    ├────────────────

>     │ data.tailscale_device.default.tags is set of string with 1 element

Reviewer: This example failure is frustrating cause it's just the type and not the elements that are not matching up. Anything we can do about that?

Author: TBH, I don't know why TF prints this info about the types. Yeah, initially, these are different types, but I use `tolist` and `sort` functions here to compare the tags correctly.
In this test, I just add some extra symbols to local tags, and that causes failure, which is expected. We can add a message like this:
```sh
│ Device mp-automation-tailscale-subnet-router.cat-crocodile.ts.net is not tagged with the correct tags.
│     The list of expected tags is: ["tag:mp-automation-tailscale-subnet-router-test"]
```
Does that look better? Or should I look for another less confusing test?

Reviewer: That's great -- Thanks! 👍

    │ local.tailscale_tags is tuple with 1 element
Device mp-automation-tailscale-subnet-router.cat-crocodile.ts.net is not tagged with the correct tags.
```

> ### Limitations to consider

Reviewer: Should this be a Heading 2? 

```suggestion
## Limitations to consider
```

Author: > Should this be a Heading 2?

Not really. These limitations are for data sources only. We can merge them into one common block if you feel like it would be better for the reader's perception.

Author: Merged this with a more general paragraph about potential pitfalls.

```

This should be considered when introducing check to existing CI/CD pipelines.

2. **Multiple data resource blocks are not supported**

Unfortunately, it's possible to define only one data source per check at the moment. Otherwise, the error will be thrown:

```sh
This check block already has a data resource defined at main.tf:83,3-27.
```

This limitation restrains creating complex assertions within one `check` block.

## Are there any potential pitfalls?

In addition to the limitations above, we recommend paying attention to a couple of things:

* While, by design, Terraform should not halt due to a check, the use of a data source can increase the operation's execution time and might cause timeout errors if Terraform fails to fetch it. Consider setting a retry limit if the provider offers this option.
* As `terraform plan` and `terraform apply` represent different stages in the workflow, the purpose of checks can also diverge into post-plan, post-apply, and the ones relevant for both cases. We see great potential for improvement here, such as the possibility of labeling or ignoring checks for a particular stage so that checks could be built-in as smoothly as possible.

> 

Reviewer: @gberenice I'm thinking we should add another section here. Something like... 

```suggestion
## Our Thoughts

Overall, we're slightly disappointed and puzzled by this new feature. When initially hearing about it, our team was excited and we were eager to try it out. But when actually using it and working on ways that we could work it into our terraform code, we found that it wasn't actually as useful as we would like. It does not solve our needs around unit testing individual resources, it is attached to the lifecycle of `plan` and `apply`, and we don't have a means by which to flag a `check` block as a critical assertion that should halt execution. 

We believe there is still a lot to be done on the terraform testing and validation front and we're eager to see more functionality from the `check` block and language as a whole. 
```

We'd need to reword the conclusion a bit, but what do you think?  I want us to be honest... because I'm not very excited about this feature anymore and I think I'm still struggling on where we can use it.

Author: Haha, is that your impression after reading this draft or you tried to build-in the `check` feature in your work?
The conclusion is on its way 👍

Author: Final conclusion was merged with "Our thoughts" block.

---
visible: true
draft: false
title: "Understanding the Terraform Check Block Feature"
author: Veronika Gnilitska

> slug: understanding-the-terraform-check-block-feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: understanding-terraform-check
```

> date: TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-08-10T09:00:00.00Z
```

_Infrastructure validation_ generally refers to checking the correctness of infrastructure code against specified standards or requirements before it's deployed. For instance, native Terraform commands like `validate` or `plan` or tools like [TFLint](https://github.com/terraform-linters/tflint) mainly focus on the correctness of code and check the syntax and internal consistency, ensuring it's well-structured and free from apparent errors before deployment.

_Infrastructure testing_, on the other hand, usually takes place after the infrastructure has been provisioned and validates that it's functioning as expected. This can include unit tests, integration tests, functional tests, and acceptance tests, among others. Testing tools like [Kitchen-Terraform](https://newcontext-oss.github.io/kitchen-terraform/) and [Terratest](https://terratest.gruntwork.io/) are commonly used for these kinds of tests. They can confirm that resources are adequately created and connected, security groups allow/deny correct traffic, etc.

> Both infrastructure validation and testing are essential for a healthy development process. Here is where the `check` feature comes into play and might feed two birds with one crumb.

Reviewer: > feed two birds with one crumb

This is my new favorite saying -- Love it 👏

> First, checks can work great when the actual resource provisioning isn't the primary focus of the assertion. Given the necessity of configuring sandbox environments (whether ephemeral or persistent, hosted in the cloud, or run locally using mocking tools) and writing tests in Ruby or Go, native HCL `check` blocks can be seen as a practical alternative.

Reviewer: This 2nd sentence was confusing and I think we can drop it? Let me know if you disagree. 
```suggestion
First, checks can work great when the actual resource provisioning isn't the primary focus of the assertion.
```

Author: Yeah, I'm not opposed to that. Initially, I wanted to emphasize that a user needs to think about provisioning a testing environment, while checks are run against a "real" one. But this text was rewritten a lot, and this thought probably has lost its value and clarity.

```hcl
terraform {
  required_version = "~> 1.5"
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "~> 4.0"
    }
  }
}
```

Let’s define a check that validates that our cluster instance is healthy and available:
```hcl
check "aws_eks_cluster_default" {
  assert {
    condition     = aws_eks_cluster.default.status == "ACTIVE"
    error_message = "EKS cluster ${aws_eks_cluster.default.id} status is ${aws_eks_cluster.default.status}"
  }
}
```

## Using a data source in the assertions

In addition to simple assertions, Terraform offers the ability to reference a data source within `check` block assertions. It’s queried by Terraform at the end of each plan and apply operations to evaluate the checks and obtain the most recent data from your environment.

> Terraform’s operation won’t be interrupted by failures in the scoped data block or any unsuccessful assertions. This unlocks continuous validation of your assumptions about the infrastructure rather than being confined to the point of initial provisioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Terraform’s operation won’t be interrupted by failures in the scoped data block or any unsuccessful assertions**. This unlocks continuous validation of your assumptions about the infrastructure rather than being confined to the point of initial provisioning.
```

  ```

  This limitation restrains creating complex assertions within one `check` block.

## Final Thoughts

While intriguing on paper, Terraform's new check block feature has yet to live up to our initial expectations fully. Its practical integration into our Terraform code has revealed some limitations, and it felt less revolutionary than we'd hoped. There were a few hitches like it being equally tied to the plan and apply lifecycle and not being able to flag a check block as a critical fail-safe.

We realize its effectiveness may vary across different scenarios and contexts. It's easy to implement and integrate into your existing infrastructure. While it's unlikely to replace testing tools and strategies completely, it can undoubtedly bear the burden in some cases, especially considering potential improvements in the future. We'll keep this feature in our toolkit as we refine our infrastructure code.

That being said, there's still a good deal of progress to be made in Terraform's testing and validation arena. We recommend exploring and leveraging this feature and look forward to hearing feedback and thoughts from the community!

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Update: New `test` command command in Terraform v1.6

As we were wrapping up this blog post, the Terraform team has released their preview of v1.6 Terraform and announced that it will primarily add a new `terraform test` command that we're very excited for! [More information can be found here](https://discuss.hashicorp.com/t/request-for-testing-terraform-test/56254) and we look forward to testing this out and writing about it in an upcoming Masterpoint post! 

```

Author: Great idea! I've edited it a bit to avoid using `Terraform` twice, if you don't mind.

Reviewer: Nice!
